(Draft Ballot) EV Guidelines Agency Disclosure (#11)
sleevi/cabforum-docs: docs/EVG.md

Effective as of 1 September 2020, the CA MUST publicly disclose through an appropriate and readily accessible online means that is available on a 24x7 basis every Incorporating Agency and Registration Agency it has determined satisfies the requirements in these Guidelines. The CA SHALL document where to obtain this information within Section 3.2 of the CA's Certificate Policy and/or Certification Practice Statement. This Agency Information SHALL include the following:
* Sufficient information to unambiguously identify the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency (such as a name, jurisdiction, and website); and,
* The accepted values for the `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) fields when a certificate is issued using information from that Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, indicating the jurisidction(s) that the Agency is appropriate for; and,
* The accepted or allowed form or syntax of the Registration Number used by the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, if known; and,

> * A revision history that includes a unique version number and date of publication for any additions, modifications, or removals from this list.

Reviewer: Just want to clarify that it is acceptable that the revision history is generated by the content management or publication system, instead of being part of the document itself.

For example, we are considering publishing the list to a public github repo, where github would take care of listing the versions and the changes between versions.

Author: @timfromdigicert

If your CPS disclosed the GitHub repository, that would seem to suffice, right? There's no inherent requirement that it's a single "document". Did you feel that was not clear?

Reviewer: I think it's possible to infer that such an implementation is compliant, but I don't think it's as clear as it could be.  Also, I wanted to make sure no one disagrees that such an implementation is compliant ...

Reviewer: Perhaps - "A version history (either within the disclosure, or via a content management system or document versioning system) that includes..."

Author: Hrm, the problem with that is "within the disclosure" seems to promote the very idea this was intentionally trying to be permissive on: that it doesn't have to be a single document. I was trying to aim for maximum flexibility, which does mean not stating things explicitly, especially when they read as constraining (e.g. your language there would seem to be "either/or" and only allow those two implementations)

I worry it also might end up for the wrong approach, where simply disclosing that "versions exist" would be seen as sufficient, which is why I went with "revision history".

For better or worse, I intentionally left terrible loopholes in precisely to try and make it easy for CAs to digest. Like, read literally, a CA could simply point to their website and argue that it meets the requirements. I'm all for wanting to improve that precision, but I feel the more that's added, the greater risk that's introduced, and I'm just trying to get the bare minimum of effort out of CAs so we can make progress in the WG.

Reviewer: Hmm, I actually used disclosure instead of document to try to avoid that interpretation.  If we're trying to be permissive, there could an "or elsewhere" at the end.  The "versions exist" loophole did occur to me, as did:

2020-05-19, version 2020.05.19 - updated with latest acceptable sources
2020-05-18, version 2020.05.18 - updated with latest acceptable sources
2020-05-17, version 2020.05.17 - updated with latest acceptable sources
2020-05-16, version 2020.05.16 - updated with latest acceptable sources

But I think attempting to squash these loopholes would just encourage more creative loophole attempts.

Perhaps we just leave the language alone, and refer anyone who questions whether a github version history is acceptable (for example) to this conversation.

Author: OK, I'm going to "Resolve" this conversation (you can still link to it), but I suspect we do still need changes because of https://github.com/sleevi/cabforum-docs/pull/11/files#r425350739

Effective as of 31 May 2018, the CA's Certificate Policy and/or Certification Practice Statement MUST be structured in accordance with RFC 3647. Prior to 31 May 2018, the CA's Certificate Policy and/or Certification Practice Statement MUST be structured in accordance with either RFC 2527 or RFC 3647. The Certificate Policy and/or Certification Practice Statement MUST include all material required by RFC 3647 or, if structured as such, RFC 2527.

> Effective as of 1 September 2020, the CA MUST publicly disclose through an appropriate and readily accessible online means that is available on a 24x7 basis every Incorporating Agency and Registration Agency it has determined satisfies the requirements in these Guidelines. The CA SHALL document where to obtain this information within Section 3.2 of the CA's Certificate Policy and/or Certification Practice Statement. This Agency Information SHALL include the following:

Reviewer 2: September 1 is right around the corner for the disclosure of this list.  Would it be possible to split this into 2 phases?

1. Effective as of 1 September 2020, the CA MUST publicly disclose through an appropriate and readily accessible online means that is available on a 24x7 basis **AT LEAST 25% OF THE** Incorporating Agency and Registration Agency it has determined satisfies the requirements in these Guidelines.
2. Effective as of 1 February 2021, the CA MUST publicly disclose through an appropriate and readily accessible online means that is available on a 24x7 basis **EVERY** Incorporating Agency and Registration Agency it has determined satisfies the requirements in these Guidelines.

This way the CAs can set up the process and mechanics for disclosure "soon" and then have some more time to fully comply with this new requirement by listing every one and all of the accepted values associated with the source.

We might also want to have a clause that CAs can use a new one and then update the list within 30-60 days in case new sources are needed "urgently".  This would mean a back-dating of up to 30-60 days from use to the publishing of the new list would be permitted.

If the intent is to make this somewhat machine parseable, you might want to specify a common format so this can be processes similarly to how CCADB processes audit letters.

Author: Thanks Doug! This is great feedback, and it probably makes sense to discuss on our next call, but I’m really glad someone has looked.

Perhaps there’s some confusion to be addressed by wording, but the requirement is not to disclose what a CA has used retroactively, but to ensure disclosure going forward. September seemed eminently reasonable and there were no objections on the call, so is it possible this is just a misunderstanding?

We discussed the clause for exceptional circumstances, which was proposed by Wayne, and that seems to favor CAs over Relying Parties. I think we should continue discussion on our next validation call, because I do think it’s important to ensure any disclosures happen before issuance.

No, the intent is not to make it machine parsable, or to over engineer process. This was just trying to make some forward progress on getting the necessary disclosures so that we can move towards an industry-wide allowlist. This is simply a temporary step towards that, as CAs have otherwise not been forthcoming about what data sources they use, despite commitments on both CA Incidents and in the CABF.

This is also why it’s so important to have disclosure prior to issuance (so there is no uncertainty about whether a CA is still pending some disclosures) and a deadline within six months (e.g. September/Oct), so that we can begin compiling and discussing an allowlist within a year.

Reviewer 2: Based on the call yesterday, there was general agreement among CAs that some flexibility on the completeness or timeliness of updates was needed for the September date.  Getting a disclosed list from all CAs is a big improvement over what we have today, even if the list is up to a month behind actual practices, imo.  Please consider updating the ballot to permit CAs up to 30 days to publish new entries in their "readily accessible online" system.

Author: As mentioned on the call, a month is an unacceptably unjustified delay and is not functionally better than nothing. We did talk about having total disclosure, sooner than September, while allowing a much smaller grace period (an upper bound of a week), and potentially allowing more time for automation to be implemented.

> Effective as of 1 October 2020, the CA SHALL ensure that the information to be included is consistent with its publicly-available disclosure, as described in Section 11.1.3.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I like "information to be include is *consistent with*".  It seems like a source of many future disagreement.  I think I'd prefer something that expresses more explicitly the fact that information sources used must have been disclosed.

Author: Sure, but this is about the jurisdiction fields.

If I disclose Agency X as being relevant to Jurisdiction Y, but then issue a cert using information from Agency X and state Jurisdiction Z, then the fact the X is disclosed isn’t sufficient, because it was only disclosed for Y, and not Z.

This is trying to capture that the information in the cert must match how the CA said, via their disclosure, how they put the information in.

Reviewer: Yes, if that's what you want, I think it needs to be explicitly said.  Let me think about some language...

Author: @timfromdigicert I guess I'm not sure I understand an example of what you think "consistent with" may cause trouble. However, in the spirit of more words to say less, what do you think?

```suggestion
Effective as of 1 October 2020, prior to a certificate being issued, the CA SHALL ensure the information to be included within these fields is identical to the information disclosed within the current version of the CA's publicly-available disclosure of values for these fields, as described in Section 11.1.3.
```

Reviewer: There are a couple problems with that, including the fact that the information would only have to be consistent with a disclosed source, which is not necessarily the appropriate source or the source being used.

I think we can explicitly list the requirements (there aren't many):

"..., prior to a certificate being issued, the CA SHALL ensure its latest publicly available disclosure of sources (see Section 11.1.3) contains a source such that:

(1) the source lists the entity as being registered in that jurisdiction,
(2) the certificate fields `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) have one of the acceptable values listed for that source in the disclosure, and
(3) the Registration Number matches one of the accepted or allowed syntaxes (if disclosed)."

Or something similar.  Just to be explicitly clear of exactly what is required.

Author: @timfromdigicert I'm not sure how to reach the interpretation you're offering? The CA would have to ignore a variety of other sections (e.g. 9.2.5, 11.2.1) to reach that conclusion, right? The EVGs are clear that there is only one applicable Agency.

Your (1) is already stated elsewhere (e.g. 11.2.1 (1)), so I'm loathe to repeat it.
Your (3) seems like it would belong in 9.2.5

Let me try a different approach, to see if we're getting closer:
```suggestion
Effective as of 1 October 2020, the CA SHALL ensure that, at time of issuance, the values within these fields have been disclosed within the latest publicly-available disclosure, as described in Section 11.1.3, as acceptable values for the applicable Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency.
```

"these fields" matches the opening sentence of "contents". "applicable Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency" matches the third and fourth sentences.

And then something similar for 9.2.5?

Reviewer: That approach is fine with me, too.

For Business Entities, the Registration Number that was received by the Business Entity upon government registration SHALL be entered in this field.  For those Business Entities that register with an Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency in a jurisdiction that does not issue numbers pursuant to government registration, the date of the registration SHALL be entered into this field in any one of the common date formats.

> Effective as of 1 October 2020, the CA SHALL ensure that the format of any Registration Number that is included is consistent with the publicly-available disclosure for that Registration Agency or Incorporating Agency, as described in Section 11.1.3.

Author: ```suggestion
Effective as of 1 October 2020, the CA SHALL ensure that, at time of issuance, if the CA has disclosed a set of acceptable format or formats for Registration Numbers for the applicable Registration Agency or Incorporating Agency, as described in Section 11.1.3, that the Registration Number is valid according to at least one disclosed format for that applicable Registration Agency or Incorporating agency. 
```

As a general rule, the CA is responsible for taking all verification steps reasonably necessary to satisfy each of the Verification Requirements set forth in the subsections below.  The Acceptable Methods of Verification set forth in each of Sections 11.2 through 11.14 (which usually include alternatives) are considered to be the minimum acceptable level of verification required of the CA.  In all cases, however, the CA is responsible for taking any additional verification steps that may be reasonably necessary under the circumstances to satisfy the applicable Verification Requirement.

### 11.1.3.  Disclosure of Verification Sources

> Effective as of 1 October 2020, prior to the use of an Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency to fulfill these verification requirements, the CA MUST publicly disclose, through an appropriate and readily accessible online means, Agency Information about the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency.

Reviewer: Why is Agency Information capitalized?  I don't see a defined term for it.

> This Agency Information SHALL include at least the following:

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning that disclosures SHOULD be in a machine-readable format like XML or CSV?

* Sufficient information to unambiguously identify the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency (such as a name, jurisdiction, and website); and,

> * The accepted values for the `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) fields when a certificate is issued using information from that Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, indicating the jurisidction(s) that the Agency is appropriate for; and,

Reviewer: It is not clear here whether values (plural) refers collectively to JLN, JSOPN, and JCN, each of which has a unique value, or whether it's permitted to have multiple acceptable values for one or more of them.  The reason this gets interesting is because there are often information sources that are aggregations of other information sources, so one information source may cover multiple registration localities (that may not publish their own information sources).

Author: Since this is solely about disclosure/transparency, I’m totally fine taking a very liberal approach. I’ll open up an in-line suggestion

> * The accepted values for the `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) fields when a certificate is issued using information from that Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, indicating the jurisidction(s) that the Agency is appropriate for; and,

Author: ```suggestion
* The accepted value or values for each of the `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) fields, when a certificate is issued using information from that Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, indicating the jurisidction(s) that the Agency is appropriate for; and,
```

Author: @timfromdigicert does this wording work?

Reviewer: Good.

> * The accepted value or values for each of the `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) fields, when a certificate is issued using information from that Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, indicating the jurisidction(s) that the Agency is appropriate for; and,

Reviewer: "jurisdiction(s)"

Author: ```suggestion
* The accepted value or values for each of the `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) fields, when a certificate is issued using information from that Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, indicating the jurisdiction(s) that the Agency is appropriate for; and,
```

### 11.1.3.  Disclosure of Verification Sources

Effective as of 1 October 2020, prior to the use of an Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency to fulfill these verification requirements, the CA MUST publicly disclose, through an appropriate and readily accessible online means, Agency Information about the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency.

This Agency Information SHALL include at least the following:
* Sufficient information to unambiguously identify the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency (such as a name, jurisdiction, and website); and,
* The accepted values for the `subject:jurisdictionLocalityName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.1), `subject:jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2), and `subject:jursidictionCountryName` (OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3) fields when a certificate is issued using information from that Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, indicating the jurisidction(s) that the Agency is appropriate for; and,

> * The accepted or allowed form or syntax of the Registration Number used by the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency, if known; and,

Reviewer 2: Defining the accepted or allowed form or syntax is going above and beyond the intent of publishing a list of Agencies and should be removed from this ballot.

Author: @dougbeattie This is "if known" - it's optional.

Without this information, we're limiting ourselves to assuming that the only way we'll be able to map Incorporating Agencies / Registration Agencies is if we know all jurisdictions have 1 and exactly one such agency (which we know they don't) or we have a way to tie it to the certificate (e.g. via a new field). This is trying to explore if there's a possibility of a different option, which is using the serial number itself.

This is trying to be optional, but to call it out as important to disclose, especially as some CAs have already done so.

Reviewer 2: ""if known" leaves a lot of room for interpretation other than "optional".  Maybe a CA doesn't know because they didn't look, does that mean it's "not known"?  If you replace with "optional", then it's clear.

Is the intent of this ballot to enable mapping?  I'd suggest starting with CAs disclosing their Agencies and then take the next step to provide mapping details.  For most regions, there are 1 or only a couple of Agencies, so if someone wanted to "map" they'd have a pretty good idea of which Agency was used, even

Author: I attempted to tweak this in https://github.com/sleevi/cabforum-docs/pull/11/commits/74c8f85eaeb0a423c5d0395c6a53ee9786e5411d to make it clearer that it only applies if the CA itself restricts. Does that better address your concern?

Author: Just following up to see if this addressed @dougbeattie's concern

> * A revision history that includes a unique version number and date of publication for any additions, modifications, or removals from this list.

Reviewer 2: A date with version number is fine as long as CAs aren't obligated to provide a line by line log of everything that changed from one version to the next. To clarify this, we should delete: "additions, modifications, or removals from this list" and replace with "changes"

Author: Right. CAs aren't required to provide line-by-line logs, but versions need to be uniquely identifiable and have a sense of when they were published.

I originally had "changes", but the concern is that "changes" is ambiguous. A CA may not view an addition or removal as a change; that is, "change" is read as "modification". That's why I explicitly tried to enumerate all three, to make sure that it was unambiguous.

Do you think 'and/or' instead of 'or' would address that? To allow you to batch additions, modifications, and removals into a single contiguous version, rather than requiring a new version for each change if you make multiple changes at the same time?

I'm trying to find the balance between making it OK for CAs to batch changes, and to only have to maintain a distinct identifier for any document (so that folks can refer back to it), while also not having to add too much work. At the same time, I think there's a lot of benefit in knowing what was changed and removed (e.g. as [GLEIF](https://www.gleif.org/content/2-about-lei/7-code-lists/1-gleif-registration-authorities-list/2019-12-05_overview-changes-ra-list-v1.0-to-v1.5.pdf) publishes)

Reviewer 2: Then we should say that.  The published list of Registration Agencies / Incorporating Agencies must be versioned and dated each time the list is modified.

Author: @dougbeattie There's a problem with stating only that as you propose, because it prevents historic comparison - e.g. the CA continually modifies a single URL and just bumps the version and date, without any understanding about what changed.

I'm not sure I'm fully understanding the challenge between adding Foo and adding an entry that says "Added foo" versus not having to do that. They seem... trivial and easily playbooked?

Reviewer: It is important that it be possible to generate the version log, even if the published document is automatically generated from an internal database of approved sources.  It should simply require a date and version number bump whenever a new version is published.  In particular, it would be useful to make sure it is allowable to bump the date and version number even in the absence of changes (e.g. daily publication).

Author: @timfromdigicert I’m not sure I’m parsing you’re comment correctly. I’m reading the first sentence as “it should be possible to compare versions” and the second as “only a date and a version number need to be updated”, which seems at odds with the first?

Broadly, my high-level goal here is to understand the nature and frequency of changes, while providing as light a touch requirement as possible. I’m assuming that some CAs may implement this by publishing only their “current” version - e.g. if they’re using Google docs or a single PDF url or countless other forms - and don’t think it’s reasonable to require crawler/scrapers be developed to constantly poll 24/7 to download versions so they can be diff’d.

If the CA uses a manual process, such as human review, having the human annotate the changes in a Changelog provides that data.

If the CA uses an automated process, such as something like Github or even direct CA integration, then the existing diffs themselves contain the data.

In the worst case, if using a PDF, the CA could accomplish this requirement by publishing their new version, running a PDF diff with the old, and just adding that PDF-diff to their changelog.

That’s the high-level goal, but if there are ways to accomplish that while addressing concerns for non-goals, I’m definitely open.

Reviewer: I'm not too picky about the mechanics either, I just want to make sure a potential use case where the document is auto-generated, say, daily, is compliant.

Such a system might generate Changelog entries such as:

2020-05-15 - Version 2020.05.15 - No changes.

I just want to make sure that the language does not preclude such "updates", even if they do not include any additions, removals, or modifications.  I would argue that's already allowed by your current language, but wanted to explicitly point it out in case anyone disagrees.

Author: ```suggestion
* A revision history that includes a unique version number and date of publication for any additions, modifications, and/or removals from this list.
```

This at least attempts to address part of @dougbeattie 's concern, by making these updates batchable upon publication.
